Minutes of the Monetary Policy Council decision-making
meeting held on 4 December 2019
During the meeting, the Council pointed out that activity growth in the world economy
remained soft and uncertainty about the global economic outlook persisted. Recessionary
trends continue in industry in the major economies and annual growth in global trade is
negative. Reflecting these developments, forecasts of international financial institutions
indicate continued sluggish GDP growth worldwide in 2020.
It was emphasised that in the euro area economic growth remained low in 2019 Q3. It
was noted that industrial output in the euro area was declining and business confidence
indicators for the industrial sector – despite some improvement seen in November – still did
not signal a recovery. It was judged that economic activity in the euro area was supported
by a steady rise in consumption, driven by positive household sentiment and favourable
labour market conditions. However, certain Council members pointed to the gradually
deteriorating sentiment in services and slower annual growth in employment, which both
may pose a risk for economic conditions in the euro area.
In Germany, GDP growth in 2019 Q3 was positive and higher than expected, albeit still
very low. It was also emphasised that in the United States, the GDP data for 2019 Q3
corroborated the persistently robust economic conditions as compared to other advanced
economies, yet annual GDP growth was gradually decreasing. It was pointed out that amid
weak global economic growth, inflation in many countries was moderate, and in the euro
area it was low.
In November, oil prices in the global commodity markets were relatively stable,
although subject to temporary fluctuations driven by both supply and demand factors.
The European Central Bank is keeping the deposit rate below zero, while conducting
asset purchases and signalling the maintenance of loose monetary policy in the coming
quarters. The US Federal Reserve, after the interest rate cuts of recent months, was keeping
the rates unchanged.
In Poland, economic conditions remain good, despite slower economic growth in 2019
Q3. GDP growth is supported by stable consumption growth, fuelled by favourable labour
market conditions, very strong consumer confidence and disbursement of social benefits.
Investment continued to rise in 2019 Q3, although at a slower pace, which was most likely
due to the fall in local government investment and the slower growth in investment cofinanced
by EU funds. At the same time, it was underlined that exports growth increased in
2019 Q3, albeit it was lower than in the previous years.
Some Council members pointed out that the incoming monthly data were signalling the
likelihood of a slight slowdown in GDP growth in 2019 Q4. In October 2019, growth in
industrial output was lower than in the first half of 2019, while assembly and construction
output declined in year-on-year terms. Certain Council members also stressed that
household sentiment remained upbeat, although it had deteriorated slightly in the recent
period, and the PMI in industry continued at below 50 points.
2/3
444444444444444
444444444444444
444444444444444
The Council members indicated that wage growth in the economy had picked up
somewhat in 2019 Q3 on the back of the rising wages in the public sector. Attention was also
drawn to the persistently low unemployment rate. However, certain Council members
emphasised that demand for labour might stabilise. This was suggested by the weaker wage
growth and a further slight decrease in employment in month-on-month terms in the
corporate sector as well as the lower number of job offers in the recent period.
The majority of the Council members were of the opinion that the outlook for domestic
economic conditions remained favourable, and GDP growth – despite the expected
slowdown – would continue at a relatively high level in the coming quarters. It was argued
that the continuation of sluggish growth abroad and the possible decline in investment
growth might contain GDP growth, while the continuing rise in consumer demand would
have a stabilising impact on economic conditions.
It was pointed out that annual inflation stood at 2.6% y/y in November 2019. It was driven
up by elevated food price growth, while being curbed by lower energy prices than a year
ago, including fuel prices. Some Council members noted that inflation in month-on-month
terms was lower than in the first half of 2019.
The majority of the Council members judged that although core inflation had risen
somewhat in recent months, it remained moderate. These Council members underlined that
growth of non-food goods prices stayed very low, while core inflation was propelled by
faster growth in services prices, partly driven by increases in certain administered charges,
and partly by rising wages that reflected convergence of the Polish economy. Consequently,
the majority of the Council members assessed price pressures in the economy to be moderate.
At the same time, it was observed that the retail sales deflator was low, and producer price
growth had declined slightly below zero in the recent period. Certain Council members were
of the opinion that one of the factors behind the faster growth in services prices than in
previous years was the persisting demand pressure in the economy.
The majority of the Council members anticipated that CPI inflation would rise
temporarily in 2020 Q1, before declining and running close to the inflation target in the
subsequent quarters. It was emphasised that over the projection horizon inflation would be
contained by weaker economic growth in Poland and the likely persistence of low inflation
abroad. The majority of the Council members emphasised that the forecast temporary rise in
inflation in 2020 Q1 would stem from factors beyond the reach of domestic monetary policy,
including statistical base effects. Moreover, it was judged that uncertainty about energy price
growth in the coming quarters continued.
Certain Council members were of the opinion that inflation in the subsequent quarters
might remain higher than 2.5%. They underlined that price growth might be boosted by
further growth in services prices, including prices of administered services. They also
pointed out the potential upward pressure on inflation stemming from the growth in
monetary aggregates, related to the rapid – in their opinion – expansion in consumer and
housing loans to households. In this context, these Council members additionally observed
that the NBP reference rate was negative in real terms, and that the rise in inflation in 2020
Q1, should it materialise, would bring it down.
3/3
444444444444444
444444444444444
444444444444444
In turn, the majority of the Council members indicated that central bank interest rates
were currently negative in real terms in many economies, including, in particular, in the euro
area. They also pointed out that the real interest rates on lending to households and
enterprises were well into positive territory. These Council members underlined that total
credit growth in the economy was stable and remained lower than nominal GDP growth,
while corporate lending growth was slowing down.
The majority of the Council members decided that interest rates should remain
unchanged. In their opinion, the outlook for the domestic economy remained favourable and
GDP growth, despite the expected decline, would continue at a relatively high level in the
coming quarters. At the same time, the Council assessed that uncertainty as to the scale and
duration of the economic slowdown abroad and its impact on domestic economic activity
persisted. In the opinion of the majority of the Council members, after a temporary rise in
2020 Q1, inflation would stay close to the target over the monetary policy transmission
horizon. Consequently, the majority of the Council members judged that the current level of
interest rates was conducive to keeping the Polish economy on a sustainable growth path
and maintaining macroeconomic stability.
The majority of the Council members also expressed an opinion that, taking into account
current information, interest rates were likely to remain stable in the coming quarters. These
Council members pointed out that their assessment was supported by current forecasts
indicating that inflation would remain in line with the NBP inflation target over the monetary
policy horizon amid the forecast gradual slowing in GDP growth.
Certain Council members emphasised that there were factors that might boost inflation
higher than indicated by the current forecasts. They noted that should there be a significant
rise in inflation and inflation expectations that would jeopardize meeting the inflation target
in the medium term, it might be justified to consider an increase in interest rates in the
coming quarters.
In turn, certain Council members pointed out that signs of a deterioration in global
economic conditions persisted. In the opinion of these Council members, the above factors
could also have a negative impact on economic growth in Poland in the quarters to come. At
the same time, the risk of a lasting deviation of inflation from the NBP target was limited. As
a result, a view was expressed that it was justified to lower interest rates at the current
meeting and that – in the longer run – it might be justified to consider a further decrease in
interest rates or the introduction of unconventional monetary policy instruments.
At the meeting a motion to cut the NBP interest rates by 0.25 percentage points was
submitted. The motion was rejected. The Council decided to keep the NBP interest rates
unchanged: the reference rate at 1.50%, the lombard rate at 2.50%, the deposit rate at 0.50%
and the rediscount rate at 1.75%.
Publication date: 19 December 2019
